---
layout: meetup
title:  "RStan: Statistical Modeling Made Easy with Bob Carpenter"
date:   2015-08-05
type: meetup
meetup: http://www.meetup.com/Ann-Arbor-R-User-Group/events/223802318/
---

In August we were visted by special guest Dr. Bob Carpenter, a research scientist in computational statistics (Columbia University). He designed the Stan probabilistic programming language and is one of the Stan core developers.

Bob has a Ph.D. in cognitive and computer science (University of Edinburgh), worked as a professor of computational linguistics (Carnegie Mellon University), an industrial researcher and programmer in speech recognition and natural language processing (Bell Labs, 
SpeechWorks, LingPipe).

Bob introduced Stan, a new language for expressing statistical models with support for full Bayesian inference via sampling (Hamiltonian Monte Carlo) and maximum likelihood estimation via optimization (L-BFGS) and curvature (higher-order autodiff). He began with an introduction to Bayesian modeling and how it preserves estimation uncertainty in posterior inference, focusing on event probability estimation, decision theory, and out-of-sample prediction. He also introduced Stan's modeling language based on examples, working up from the very basics (Bernoulli model of binary outcomes, simple linear regression), through our bread and butter algorithms (multilevel generalized linear models, aka mixed effects), and finishing with some advanced model examples (Gaussian processes, diff eq physical system models). Bob provided a high-level overview of the back end, touching on how models get translated to C++, how automatic differentiation allows us to compute gradients up to machine precision, how variables are transformed to unconstrained support on the real numbers, and how our adaptive Hamiltonian Monte Carlo works using animations. Bob also introduced ShinyStan, an interactive posterior visualization tool, and describe the latest edition to Stan, black-box variational inference. Finally he wrapped up with an overview of what we have in store over the next couple of years ([PDF slides](https://github.com/AnnArborRUserGroup/Presentations/blob/master/2015-08/rstan-ann-arbor-2015.pdf))..
